doc/TAG_MANAGEMENT.md, before:

# Git Tag Management Guide

This guide provides comprehensive instructions and best practices for managing Git tags within the `vglog-filter` project. Proper tag management is crucial for maintaining a clean repository, accurately tracking releases, and ensuring consistency with our semantic versioning strategy.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview of Tag Management](#overview-of-tag-management)
- [Tagging Strategy and Conventions](#tagging-strategy-and-conventions)
- [Automated Tag Cleanup](#automated-tag-cleanup)
- [Manual Tag Management with `tag-manager`](#manual-tag-management-with-tag-manager)
- [Troubleshooting Tag Issues](#troubleshooting-tag-issues)
- [Best Practices for Tagging](#best-practices-for-tagging)

## Overview of Tag Management

In `vglog-filter`, Git tags are primarily used to mark official releases and significant milestones. Our approach emphasizes automation and consistency to avoid common issues such as:

-   **Tag Proliferation**: Preventing an excessive number of tags for minor changes.
-   **Inconsistent Formats**: Ensuring all release tags follow a standardized naming convention.
-   **Manual Errors**: Reducing the likelihood of human error in tagging.

This is achieved through:
-   **Semantic Versioning**: All release tags adhere to the `vX.Y.Z` format, reflecting major, minor, and patch versions.
-   **Automated Release Workflow**: New release tags are automatically created by GitHub Actions as part of the [Release Workflow](RELEASE_WORKFLOW.md).
-   **Automated Tag Cleanup**: A dedicated GitHub Actions workflow periodically cleans up old tags.
-   **`tag-manager` Script**: A command-line utility for local and manual tag operations with advanced features.
-   **LOC-Based Delta System**: Advanced versioning that ensures consistent tag progression with mathematical bonus calculations.

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Tagging Strategy and Conventions

Our tagging strategy is tightly integrated with our [Semantic Versioning](VERSIONING.md) and [Release Workflow](RELEASE_WORKFLOW.md).

### When to Create Tags

Tags are created exclusively for official releases. They are **not** created for every commit. A new tag is generated when:

-   A **MAJOR** release occurs (e.g., `v10.5.12` to `v11.0.0`): Signifies breaking changes or large-scale refactoring.
-   A **MINOR** release occurs (e.g., `v10.5.12` to `v10.6.0`): Signifies new backward-compatible features.
-   A **PATCH** release occurs (e.g., `v10.5.12` to `v10.5.13`): Signifies backward-compatible bug fixes or minor improvements.

These version bumps are determined by the advanced LOC-based delta system with mathematical bonus calculations, automated by the `version-bump.yml` GitHub Actions workflow.

### Tag Naming Convention

All release tags must follow the `vX.Y.Z` format, where:
-   `v`: A mandatory prefix indicating a version tag.
-   `X`: The major version number.
-   `Y`: The minor version number.
-   `Z`: The patch version number.

**Examples:** `v10.5.12`, `v10.5.13`, `v10.6.0`, `v11.0.0-beta.1` (for prereleases).

This consistent format ensures easy parsing and sorting of tags.

### Current Version Context

The project uses the advanced LOC-based delta system with mathematical bonus calculations. This means:
- Version changes are calculated based on Lines of Code (LOC) changed plus bonus additions from 7 categories
- The system uses mathematical thresholds (major: 8+, minor: 4+, patch: 0+) to determine bump type
- Rollover logic uses mod 1000 for patch and minor version limits
- Example progression: `10.5.12` → `10.5.13` → `10.5.14` → ... → `10.6.0` (patch rollover)
- Bonus categories include: breaking changes, security/stability, performance, features, code quality, infrastructure, and user experience

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Automated Tag Cleanup

To prevent the accumulation of old or unnecessary tags, `vglog-filter` utilizes an automated tag cleanup workflow.

### GitHub Actions Workflow (`tag-cleanup.yml`)

A dedicated GitHub Actions workflow is responsible for periodically cleaning up old tags from the repository.

-   **Schedule**: By default, this workflow runs every Sunday at 2 AM UTC.
-   **Retention Policy**: It keeps the 10 most recent tags by default. This number is configurable.
-   **Manual Trigger**: The workflow can also be triggered manually from the GitHub Actions interface for immediate cleanup.
-   **Dry Run Mode**: The manual trigger allows for a `dry_run` option, which shows which tags *would* be deleted without actually deleting them.

#### How to Trigger Manually (with Dry Run)

1.  Navigate to your repository on GitHub.
2.  Go to the **Actions** tab.
3.  Select the workflow named **"Tag Cleanup"** from the left sidebar.
4.  Click the **"Run workflow"** dropdown button on the right.
5.  In the form:
    -   Set `keep_count` to your desired number of tags to retain (e.g., `10`).
    -   Set `dry_run` to `true` to preview the deletion without making actual changes.
6.  Click **"Run workflow"**.
7.  Review the workflow logs to see which tags would be deleted. If satisfied, run again with `dry_run` set to `false`.

### Tag Cleanup Strategy

The cleanup strategy prioritizes:
1. **Recent Releases**: Always keep the most recent tags
2. **Major Versions**: Preserve tags representing major version milestones
3. **Stability**: Maintain a clean, manageable tag history
4. **Automation**: Reduce manual maintenance overhead

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Manual Tag Management with `tag-manager`

The `dev-bin/tag-manager.sh` script provides comprehensive command-line utilities for local and manual management of Git tags. This advanced tool includes numerous configuration options and safety features.

### Basic Commands

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list [glob]`**: Lists all Git tags in the repository, sorted by version (newest first). Optional glob pattern for filtering.
    ```bash
    # List all tags
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list
    
    # List tags matching pattern
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list 'v10.*'
    
    # Example output:
    # v10.5.12
    # v10.5.10
    # v10.5.0
    # v10.4.0
    # v10.3.0
    ```

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup [keep] [glob]`**: Interactively cleans up old tags. If `keep` is provided, it will keep only the specified number of most recent tags. Optional glob pattern for filtering.
    ```bash
    # Interactively clean up tags
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup

    # Keep only the 5 most recent tags
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 5
    
    # Keep 20 tags matching pattern
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 20 'v10.*'
    ```

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create <version> [commit]`**: Creates a new tag with the specified version at the given commit (defaults to HEAD). Accepts both "1.2.3" and "v1.2.3" formats.
    ```bash
    # Create a tag for version 10.5.13 at HEAD
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13

    # Create a tag for version 10.5.13 at specific commit
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create v10.5.13 3f2c1d2
    ```

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh info <tag>`**: Shows detailed information about a specific tag, including commit hash, author, date, and changes since previous release.
    ```bash
    # Get information about a specific tag
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh info v10.5.12
    ```

### Advanced Configuration Options

The `tag-manager` script supports numerous environment variables for fine-grained control:

#### Core Settings
-   **`REMOTE`**: Remote name for push operations (default: `origin`)
-   **`TAG_GLOB`**: Glob pattern for release tags (default: `v[0-9]*.[0-9]*.[0-9]*`)
-   **`TAG_SIGN`**: Create signed tags if set to `1` (requires GPG, default: `0`)
-   **`TAG_MSG_PREFIX`**: Message prefix for tag annotations (default: `vglog-filter`)

#### Safety and Confirmation
-   **`ASSUME_YES`**: Skip confirmations for non-interactive use (default: `0`)
-   **`ALLOW_DIRTY_TAG`**: Allow tagging with dirty working tree (default: `0`)
-   **`PROTECT_CURRENT`**: Never delete tags pointing at HEAD (default: `1`)
-   **`PROTECT_GLOB`**: Space-separated glob patterns never to delete (e.g., `"v10.*.* v11.0.*"`)

#### Cleanup Behavior
-   **`DRY_RUN`**: Print actions without executing (cleanup only, default: `0`)
-   **`LOCAL_ONLY`**: Delete only local tags (default: `0`)
-   **`REMOTE_ONLY`**: Delete only remote tags (default: `0`)
-   **`FETCH_BEFORE_CLEANUP`**: Fetch tags before cleanup (default: `1`)

#### Tag Creation
-   **`PUSH_AFTER_CREATE`**: Automatically push newly created tags (default: `0`)
-   **`FIRST_PARENT`**: Show first-parent history in `info` (default: `0`)

### Advanced Usage Examples

#### Batch Operations with Safety
```bash
# Clean up with protection for major versions
PROTECT_GLOB="v10.0.* v11.0.*" ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 8

# Dry run cleanup to see what would be deleted
DRY_RUN=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 5

# Clean up only remote tags (keep local for backup)
REMOTE_ONLY=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 10
```

#### Tag Creation with Advanced Options
```bash
# Create and immediately push a signed tag
TAG_SIGN=1 PUSH_AFTER_CREATE=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13

# Create tag with custom message prefix
TAG_MSG_PREFIX="Release" ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13

# Create tag even with uncommitted changes
ALLOW_DIRTY_TAG=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13
```

#### Non-Interactive Operations
```bash
# Automated cleanup in CI/CD
ASSUME_YES=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 10

# List tags with custom pattern
TAG_GLOB="v10.*" ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list
```

### Direct Git Commands

For advanced users who prefer direct Git operations:

#### Batch Operations
```bash
# List tags matching a pattern
git tag --list "v10.*" | sort -V

# Delete multiple tags locally
git tag -d v10.1.0 v10.2.0 v10.3.0

# Push tag deletions to remote
git push origin --delete v10.1.0 v10.2.0 v10.3.0
```

#### Tag Analysis
```bash
# Show tag history with commit information
git log --tags --oneline --decorate --max-count=10

# Compare two tags
git diff v10.4.0..v10.5.12 --stat

# Show files changed between tags
git diff v10.4.0..v10.5.12 --name-only

# Show tag details with version-aware sorting
git tag --sort=-version:refname | head -10
```

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Troubleshooting Tag Issues

### Common Issues and Solutions

#### Issue: Tag Conflicts
**Symptoms**: Workflow fails with "tag already exists" error
**Solutions**:
- Check for existing tags: `git tag --list "v*"`
- Delete conflicting tag locally: `git tag -d v10.5.13`
- Delete conflicting tag remotely: `git push origin --delete v10.5.13`
- Re-run the release workflow

#### Issue: Missing Tags
**Symptoms**: Expected tags not present in repository
**Solutions**:
- Check if tags were pushed: `git ls-remote --tags origin`
- Verify local tags: `git tag --list`
- Pull latest tags: `git fetch --tags`
- Check workflow logs for tag creation failures

#### Issue: Tag Ordering Problems
**Symptoms**: Tags not sorted correctly by version
**Solutions**:
- Use version-aware sorting: `git tag --sort=-version:refname`
- Check tag format consistency
- Ensure all tags follow `vX.Y.Z` format
- Use `./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list` for proper sorting

#### Issue: Cleanup Not Working
**Symptoms**: Tag cleanup workflow fails or doesn't work as expected
**Solutions**:
- Check workflow permissions
- Verify `keep_count` parameter
- Review workflow logs for errors
- Use dry run mode first
- Check for protected tags

#### Issue: Tag Manager Script Errors
**Symptoms**: `tag-manager` script fails or behaves unexpectedly
**Solutions**:
- Check Bash version (requires ≥ 4): `bash --version`
- Verify environment variables: `./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh --help`
- Check Git repository status: `git status`
- Ensure proper permissions: `ls -la dev-bin/tag-manager.sh`

### Debugging Commands

```bash
# Check current tags with version sorting
git tag --list | sort -V

# Verify tag format consistency
git tag --list | grep -E "^v[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\.[0-9]+$"

# Check remote tags
git ls-remote --tags origin

# Show tag details with dates
git for-each-ref --format='%(refname:short) %(creatordate)' refs/tags | sort -k2

# Check tag-manager configuration
./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh --help

# Verify Git configuration
git config --list | grep -E "(user\.name|user\.email|remote\.origin)"
```

### Getting Help

-   **GitHub Actions Logs**: Check the detailed logs of the tag cleanup workflow for specific error messages.
-   **`tag-manager` Output**: Use the verbose output of the tag manager script to understand tag operations.
-   **Git Documentation**: Refer to the [Git Tag Documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-tag) for advanced tag operations.
-   **Project Documentation**: Consult the [Versioning Guide](VERSIONING.md) and [Release Workflow Guide](RELEASE_WORKFLOW.md) for context.

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Best Practices for Tagging

### Automated Tagging

1.  **Rely on Automation**: Let the GitHub Actions workflow handle tag creation for releases. Avoid manually creating tags for official releases.
2.  **Conventional Commits**: Use proper commit message formats to ensure accurate version detection and tag creation.
3.  **Review Before Release**: Always review the suggested version bump before triggering a release.
4.  **Test Prereleases**: Use prerelease tags (e.g., `v11.0.0-beta.1`) for major changes to allow testing before stable release.

### Manual Tagging (When Necessary)

1.  **Use `tag-manager`**: Prefer the `tag-manager` script over direct Git commands for consistency and safety.
2.  **Follow Naming Convention**: Always use the `vX.Y.Z` format for release tags.
3.  **Document Purpose**: Include meaningful commit messages when creating tags manually.
4.  **Coordinate with Team**: Ensure team members are aware of manual tag operations.
5.  **Use Safety Features**: Leverage `DRY_RUN`, `PROTECT_GLOB`, and `PROTECT_CURRENT` for safe operations.

### Tag Maintenance

1.  **Regular Cleanup**: Periodically clean up old tags to maintain repository health.
2.  **Monitor Tag Count**: Keep the number of tags manageable (recommended: 10-20 recent tags).
3.  **Preserve Important Tags**: Ensure major version tags are preserved during cleanup.
4.  **Backup Strategy**: Consider backing up important tags before cleanup operations.
5.  **Use Protection Patterns**: Configure `PROTECT_GLOB` to safeguard critical version tags.

### Integration with LOC-Based Delta System

1.  **Understand Delta Calculations**: Be aware of how the LOC-based delta system with mathematical bonus calculations affects version increments.
2.  **Monitor Rollovers**: Watch for patch and minor version rollovers in the versioning system.
3.  **Configuration Management**: Use the YAML configuration system for consistent versioning behavior.
4.  **Predictable Progression**: The system ensures predictable tag progression with calculated increments based on 7 bonus categories.
5.  **Mathematical Thresholds**: Understand the pure mathematical thresholds (major: 8+, minor: 4+, patch: 0+) that determine version bump types.

### Quality Assurance

1.  **Tag Verification**: Always verify that tags are created correctly after release workflows.
2.  **Release Notes**: Ensure release notes are generated and attached to tags.
3.  **Testing**: Test releases locally before pushing tags to remote.
4.  **Documentation**: Keep tag management documentation up-to-date.
5.  **Validation**: Use `./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh info` to verify tag contents and metadata.

### Security Considerations

1.  **Protected Tags**: Consider protecting important tags from accidental deletion.
2.  **Access Control**: Limit tag creation and deletion permissions to authorized users.
3.  **Audit Trail**: Maintain logs of tag operations for security auditing.
4.  **Backup Strategy**: Implement backup strategies for critical tags.
5.  **Signed Tags**: Use `TAG_SIGN=1` for cryptographic verification of tag authenticity.

### Environment-Specific Considerations

1.  **CI/CD Integration**: Use `ASSUME_YES=1` for automated environments.
2.  **Development Workflows**: Use `DRY_RUN=1` for testing cleanup operations.
3.  **Remote Management**: Use `FETCH_BEFORE_CLEANUP=1` to ensure remote synchronization.
4.  **Local Development**: Use `LOCAL_ONLY=1` for development-only cleanup.

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

Commit message:

refactor: rename project from vglog-filter to next-version throughout codebase
- Update all script headers and comments in dev-bin/ scripts
- Replace project references in documentation files
- Update test expectations and temporary directory names
- Change GitHub URLs and repository references
- Update executable names and installation paths
- Modify configuration variables and default values
- Update help text and tool descriptions

This comprehensive rename ensures consistent project naming across all files.

doc/TAG_MANAGEMENT.md, after:

# Git Tag Management Guide

This guide provides comprehensive instructions and best practices for managing Git tags within the `next-version` project. Proper tag management is crucial for maintaining a clean repository, accurately tracking releases, and ensuring consistency with our semantic versioning strategy.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview of Tag Management](#overview-of-tag-management)
- [Tagging Strategy and Conventions](#tagging-strategy-and-conventions)
- [Automated Tag Cleanup](#automated-tag-cleanup)
- [Manual Tag Management with `tag-manager`](#manual-tag-management-with-tag-manager)
- [Troubleshooting Tag Issues](#troubleshooting-tag-issues)
- [Best Practices for Tagging](#best-practices-for-tagging)

## Overview of Tag Management

In `next-version`, Git tags are primarily used to mark official releases and significant milestones. Our approach emphasizes automation and consistency to avoid common issues such as:

-   **Tag Proliferation**: Preventing an excessive number of tags for minor changes.
-   **Inconsistent Formats**: Ensuring all release tags follow a standardized naming convention.
-   **Manual Errors**: Reducing the likelihood of human error in tagging.

This is achieved through:
-   **Semantic Versioning**: All release tags adhere to the `vX.Y.Z` format, reflecting major, minor, and patch versions.
-   **Automated Release Workflow**: New release tags are automatically created by GitHub Actions as part of the [Release Workflow](RELEASE_WORKFLOW.md).
-   **Automated Tag Cleanup**: A dedicated GitHub Actions workflow periodically cleans up old tags.
-   **`tag-manager` Script**: A command-line utility for local and manual tag operations with advanced features.
-   **LOC-Based Delta System**: Advanced versioning that ensures consistent tag progression with mathematical bonus calculations.

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Tagging Strategy and Conventions

Our tagging strategy is tightly integrated with our [Semantic Versioning](VERSIONING.md) and [Release Workflow](RELEASE_WORKFLOW.md).

### When to Create Tags

Tags are created exclusively for official releases. They are **not** created for every commit. A new tag is generated when:

-   A **MAJOR** release occurs (e.g., `v10.5.12` to `v11.0.0`): Signifies breaking changes or large-scale refactoring.
-   A **MINOR** release occurs (e.g., `v10.5.12` to `v10.6.0`): Signifies new backward-compatible features.
-   A **PATCH** release occurs (e.g., `v10.5.12` to `v10.5.13`): Signifies backward-compatible bug fixes or minor improvements.

These version bumps are determined by the advanced LOC-based delta system with mathematical bonus calculations, automated by the `version-bump.yml` GitHub Actions workflow.

### Tag Naming Convention

All release tags must follow the `vX.Y.Z` format, where:
-   `v`: A mandatory prefix indicating a version tag.
-   `X`: The major version number.
-   `Y`: The minor version number.
-   `Z`: The patch version number.

**Examples:** `v10.5.12`, `v10.5.13`, `v10.6.0`, `v11.0.0-beta.1` (for prereleases).

This consistent format ensures easy parsing and sorting of tags.

### Current Version Context

The project uses the advanced LOC-based delta system with mathematical bonus calculations. This means:
- Version changes are calculated based on Lines of Code (LOC) changed plus bonus additions from 7 categories
- The system uses mathematical thresholds (major: 8+, minor: 4+, patch: 0+) to determine bump type
- Rollover logic uses mod 1000 for patch and minor version limits
- Example progression: `10.5.12` → `10.5.13` → `10.5.14` → ... → `10.6.0` (patch rollover)
- Bonus categories include: breaking changes, security/stability, performance, features, code quality, infrastructure, and user experience

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Automated Tag Cleanup

To prevent the accumulation of old or unnecessary tags, `next-version` utilizes an automated tag cleanup workflow.

### GitHub Actions Workflow (`tag-cleanup.yml`)

A dedicated GitHub Actions workflow is responsible for periodically cleaning up old tags from the repository.

-   **Schedule**: By default, this workflow runs every Sunday at 2 AM UTC.
-   **Retention Policy**: It keeps the 10 most recent tags by default. This number is configurable.
-   **Manual Trigger**: The workflow can also be triggered manually from the GitHub Actions interface for immediate cleanup.
-   **Dry Run Mode**: The manual trigger allows for a `dry_run` option, which shows which tags *would* be deleted without actually deleting them.

#### How to Trigger Manually (with Dry Run)

1.  Navigate to your repository on GitHub.
2.  Go to the **Actions** tab.
3.  Select the workflow named **"Tag Cleanup"** from the left sidebar.
4.  Click the **"Run workflow"** dropdown button on the right.
5.  In the form:
    -   Set `keep_count` to your desired number of tags to retain (e.g., `10`).
    -   Set `dry_run` to `true` to preview the deletion without making actual changes.
6.  Click **"Run workflow"**.
7.  Review the workflow logs to see which tags would be deleted. If satisfied, run again with `dry_run` set to `false`.

### Tag Cleanup Strategy

The cleanup strategy prioritizes:
1. **Recent Releases**: Always keep the most recent tags
2. **Major Versions**: Preserve tags representing major version milestones
3. **Stability**: Maintain a clean, manageable tag history
4. **Automation**: Reduce manual maintenance overhead

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Manual Tag Management with `tag-manager`

The `dev-bin/tag-manager.sh` script provides comprehensive command-line utilities for local and manual management of Git tags. This advanced tool includes numerous configuration options and safety features.

### Basic Commands

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list [glob]`**: Lists all Git tags in the repository, sorted by version (newest first). Optional glob pattern for filtering.
    ```bash
    # List all tags
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list
    
    # List tags matching pattern
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list 'v10.*'
    
    # Example output:
    # v10.5.12
    # v10.5.10
    # v10.5.0
    # v10.4.0
    # v10.3.0
    ```

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup [keep] [glob]`**: Interactively cleans up old tags. If `keep` is provided, it will keep only the specified number of most recent tags. Optional glob pattern for filtering.
    ```bash
    # Interactively clean up tags
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup

    # Keep only the 5 most recent tags
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 5
    
    # Keep 20 tags matching pattern
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 20 'v10.*'
    ```

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create <version> [commit]`**: Creates a new tag with the specified version at the given commit (defaults to HEAD). Accepts both "1.2.3" and "v1.2.3" formats.
    ```bash
    # Create a tag for version 10.5.13 at HEAD
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13

    # Create a tag for version 10.5.13 at specific commit
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create v10.5.13 3f2c1d2
    ```

-   **`./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh info <tag>`**: Shows detailed information about a specific tag, including commit hash, author, date, and changes since previous release.
    ```bash
    # Get information about a specific tag
    ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh info v10.5.12
    ```

### Advanced Configuration Options

The `tag-manager` script supports numerous environment variables for fine-grained control:

#### Core Settings
-   **`REMOTE`**: Remote name for push operations (default: `origin`)
-   **`TAG_GLOB`**: Glob pattern for release tags (default: `v[0-9]*.[0-9]*.[0-9]*`)
-   **`TAG_SIGN`**: Create signed tags if set to `1` (requires GPG, default: `0`)
-   **`TAG_MSG_PREFIX`**: Message prefix for tag annotations (default: `next-version`)

#### Safety and Confirmation
-   **`ASSUME_YES`**: Skip confirmations for non-interactive use (default: `0`)
-   **`ALLOW_DIRTY_TAG`**: Allow tagging with dirty working tree (default: `0`)
-   **`PROTECT_CURRENT`**: Never delete tags pointing at HEAD (default: `1`)
-   **`PROTECT_GLOB`**: Space-separated glob patterns never to delete (e.g., `"v10.*.* v11.0.*"`)

#### Cleanup Behavior
-   **`DRY_RUN`**: Print actions without executing (cleanup only, default: `0`)
-   **`LOCAL_ONLY`**: Delete only local tags (default: `0`)
-   **`REMOTE_ONLY`**: Delete only remote tags (default: `0`)
-   **`FETCH_BEFORE_CLEANUP`**: Fetch tags before cleanup (default: `1`)

#### Tag Creation
-   **`PUSH_AFTER_CREATE`**: Automatically push newly created tags (default: `0`)
-   **`FIRST_PARENT`**: Show first-parent history in `info` (default: `0`)

### Advanced Usage Examples

#### Batch Operations with Safety
```bash
# Clean up with protection for major versions
PROTECT_GLOB="v10.0.* v11.0.*" ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 8

# Dry run cleanup to see what would be deleted
DRY_RUN=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 5

# Clean up only remote tags (keep local for backup)
REMOTE_ONLY=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 10
```

#### Tag Creation with Advanced Options
```bash
# Create and immediately push a signed tag
TAG_SIGN=1 PUSH_AFTER_CREATE=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13

# Create tag with custom message prefix
TAG_MSG_PREFIX="Release" ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13

# Create tag even with uncommitted changes
ALLOW_DIRTY_TAG=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh create 10.5.13
```

#### Non-Interactive Operations
```bash
# Automated cleanup in CI/CD
ASSUME_YES=1 ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh cleanup 10

# List tags with custom pattern
TAG_GLOB="v10.*" ./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list
```

### Direct Git Commands

For advanced users who prefer direct Git operations:

#### Batch Operations
```bash
# List tags matching a pattern
git tag --list "v10.*" | sort -V

# Delete multiple tags locally
git tag -d v10.1.0 v10.2.0 v10.3.0

# Push tag deletions to remote
git push origin --delete v10.1.0 v10.2.0 v10.3.0
```

#### Tag Analysis
```bash
# Show tag history with commit information
git log --tags --oneline --decorate --max-count=10

# Compare two tags
git diff v10.4.0..v10.5.12 --stat

# Show files changed between tags
git diff v10.4.0..v10.5.12 --name-only

# Show tag details with version-aware sorting
git tag --sort=-version:refname | head -10
```

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Troubleshooting Tag Issues

### Common Issues and Solutions

#### Issue: Tag Conflicts
**Symptoms**: Workflow fails with "tag already exists" error
**Solutions**:
- Check for existing tags: `git tag --list "v*"`
- Delete conflicting tag locally: `git tag -d v10.5.13`
- Delete conflicting tag remotely: `git push origin --delete v10.5.13`
- Re-run the release workflow

#### Issue: Missing Tags
**Symptoms**: Expected tags not present in repository
**Solutions**:
- Check if tags were pushed: `git ls-remote --tags origin`
- Verify local tags: `git tag --list`
- Pull latest tags: `git fetch --tags`
- Check workflow logs for tag creation failures

#### Issue: Tag Ordering Problems
**Symptoms**: Tags not sorted correctly by version
**Solutions**:
- Use version-aware sorting: `git tag --sort=-version:refname`
- Check tag format consistency
- Ensure all tags follow `vX.Y.Z` format
- Use `./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh list` for proper sorting

#### Issue: Cleanup Not Working
**Symptoms**: Tag cleanup workflow fails or doesn't work as expected
**Solutions**:
- Check workflow permissions
- Verify `keep_count` parameter
- Review workflow logs for errors
- Use dry run mode first
- Check for protected tags

#### Issue: Tag Manager Script Errors
**Symptoms**: `tag-manager` script fails or behaves unexpectedly
**Solutions**:
- Check Bash version (requires ≥ 4): `bash --version`
- Verify environment variables: `./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh --help`
- Check Git repository status: `git status`
- Ensure proper permissions: `ls -la dev-bin/tag-manager.sh`

### Debugging Commands

```bash
# Check current tags with version sorting
git tag --list | sort -V

# Verify tag format consistency
git tag --list | grep -E "^v[0-9]+\.[0-9]+\.[0-9]+$"

# Check remote tags
git ls-remote --tags origin

# Show tag details with dates
git for-each-ref --format='%(refname:short) %(creatordate)' refs/tags | sort -k2

# Check tag-manager configuration
./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh --help

# Verify Git configuration
git config --list | grep -E "(user\.name|user\.email|remote\.origin)"
```

### Getting Help

-   **GitHub Actions Logs**: Check the detailed logs of the tag cleanup workflow for specific error messages.
-   **`tag-manager` Output**: Use the verbose output of the tag manager script to understand tag operations.
-   **Git Documentation**: Refer to the [Git Tag Documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-tag) for advanced tag operations.
-   **Project Documentation**: Consult the [Versioning Guide](VERSIONING.md) and [Release Workflow Guide](RELEASE_WORKFLOW.md) for context.

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)

## Best Practices for Tagging

### Automated Tagging

1.  **Rely on Automation**: Let the GitHub Actions workflow handle tag creation for releases. Avoid manually creating tags for official releases.
2.  **Conventional Commits**: Use proper commit message formats to ensure accurate version detection and tag creation.
3.  **Review Before Release**: Always review the suggested version bump before triggering a release.
4.  **Test Prereleases**: Use prerelease tags (e.g., `v11.0.0-beta.1`) for major changes to allow testing before stable release.

### Manual Tagging (When Necessary)

1.  **Use `tag-manager`**: Prefer the `tag-manager` script over direct Git commands for consistency and safety.
2.  **Follow Naming Convention**: Always use the `vX.Y.Z` format for release tags.
3.  **Document Purpose**: Include meaningful commit messages when creating tags manually.
4.  **Coordinate with Team**: Ensure team members are aware of manual tag operations.
5.  **Use Safety Features**: Leverage `DRY_RUN`, `PROTECT_GLOB`, and `PROTECT_CURRENT` for safe operations.

### Tag Maintenance

1.  **Regular Cleanup**: Periodically clean up old tags to maintain repository health.
2.  **Monitor Tag Count**: Keep the number of tags manageable (recommended: 10-20 recent tags).
3.  **Preserve Important Tags**: Ensure major version tags are preserved during cleanup.
4.  **Backup Strategy**: Consider backing up important tags before cleanup operations.
5.  **Use Protection Patterns**: Configure `PROTECT_GLOB` to safeguard critical version tags.

### Integration with LOC-Based Delta System

1.  **Understand Delta Calculations**: Be aware of how the LOC-based delta system with mathematical bonus calculations affects version increments.
2.  **Monitor Rollovers**: Watch for patch and minor version rollovers in the versioning system.
3.  **Configuration Management**: Use the YAML configuration system for consistent versioning behavior.
4.  **Predictable Progression**: The system ensures predictable tag progression with calculated increments based on 7 bonus categories.
5.  **Mathematical Thresholds**: Understand the pure mathematical thresholds (major: 8+, minor: 4+, patch: 0+) that determine version bump types.

### Quality Assurance

1.  **Tag Verification**: Always verify that tags are created correctly after release workflows.
2.  **Release Notes**: Ensure release notes are generated and attached to tags.
3.  **Testing**: Test releases locally before pushing tags to remote.
4.  **Documentation**: Keep tag management documentation up-to-date.
5.  **Validation**: Use `./dev-bin/tag-manager.sh info` to verify tag contents and metadata.

### Security Considerations

1.  **Protected Tags**: Consider protecting important tags from accidental deletion.
2.  **Access Control**: Limit tag creation and deletion permissions to authorized users.
3.  **Audit Trail**: Maintain logs of tag operations for security auditing.
4.  **Backup Strategy**: Implement backup strategies for critical tags.
5.  **Signed Tags**: Use `TAG_SIGN=1` for cryptographic verification of tag authenticity.

### Environment-Specific Considerations

1.  **CI/CD Integration**: Use `ASSUME_YES=1` for automated environments.
2.  **Development Workflows**: Use `DRY_RUN=1` for testing cleanup operations.
3.  **Remote Management**: Use `FETCH_BEFORE_CLEANUP=1` to ensure remote synchronization.
4.  **Local Development**: Use `LOCAL_ONLY=1` for development-only cleanup.

[↑ Back to top](#git-tag-management-guide)
